12/04/2026	One of the most important things is:	to open an instance in which I can run SQL queries from my docker container is this:

docker exec -it port_postgres psql -U portadmin -d port_analytics			
	
	Here I can run any SQL referred to my existing database

	- This could be useful at the moment of having a live application such as the power bi dashboard related to reactive work at Kier or the accounting firms conglomerate.
		It is convenient to stay within  DirectQuery: "Your Power Query step (the M code Date.From(DateTime.FromText(...))) is not compatible with DirectQuery mode. Power BI can't fold that transformation back to the source database, so it's prompting you to switch"

11/04/2026 IMPORTANT LESSON   This was something that kept me stuck for a few hours, now the project seems to be working adequately: The Full Chain of Events
1. You had PostgreSQL 18 installed directly on Windows before this project existed. It was running as a Windows service (postgresql-x64-18) and had claimed port 5432 at system startup — before Docker even launched.
2. Docker also tried to bind port 5432 via its port mapping ("5432:5432" in docker-compose.yml). Windows allowed both to claim the port simultaneously because of how the Windows TCP stack handles port sharing between processes — something Linux would refuse outright.
3. When psycopg2 connected to 127.0.0.1:5432, Windows routed it to the local Windows Postgres 18 installation, not to Docker. That local installation had never heard of portadmin — that user only existed inside the Docker container. So every connection attempt got password authentication failed for user "portadmin" from the wrong Postgres entirely.
4. Every fix we applied inside Docker — setting passwords, editing pg_hba.conf, changing auth methods — was being applied to the correct database but had zero effect on what psycopg2 was actually connecting to. We were debugging the right patient but the ambulance kept going to the wrong hospital.

Why It Was So Hard To Diagnose
The symptoms were deeply misleading:

docker compose ps showed the container as healthy — because Docker's healthcheck runs inside the container network, not through the Windows port mapping
Test-NetConnection localhost 5432 returned TcpTestSucceeded: True — the port was open, just on the wrong Postgres
docker exec -it port_postgres psql -U portadmin worked fine — because that runs inside Docker's own network and never touches Windows port routing
The error message password authentication failed pointed at credentials, not at a routing problem — so we spent a long time fixing credentials that were never the issue

The only command that revealed the truth was netstat -ano | findstr :5432 showing two different PIDs both listening on port 5432. That was the smoking gun.

The Lesson — Port Conflicts on Windows
On Linux, if two processes try to bind the same port, the second one fails immediately with address already in use. Docker would have refused to start and told you exactly why.
On Windows, the TCP stack uses a driver model that can allow multiple processes to appear to share a port, with Windows routing incoming connections between them non-deterministically or by process priority. This is why you can have two Postgres instances both reporting as listening on 5432 with no obvious error — but only one of them receives any given connection.
The safest way to avoid this in future is to always run netstat -ano | findstr :5432 before starting any database work to confirm only one process owns the port. If you see two PIDs, stop before going any further.

This is Claudias comment on the solution I have on 22/03/2026. It has a limitation given POSTGSQL as it cannot pivot the data as commented by the slides we saw on DW Lecture 3, page 10.

It is OLAP-style but not a true OLAP cube. The mart views pre-aggregate data the same way a cube pre-calculates measures, but the underlying engine is still relational PostgreSQL. This means:

Roll-up and drill-down work well but require separate queries rather than navigating a single cube hierarchy
Slice and dice are very natural given the clean star schema
Performance is fine at this data volume (~100k rows) but a genuine OLAP cube would outperform it significantly at tens of millions of rows

For a portfolio project the design is pragmatic and honest — the README even acknowledges it is warehouse-ready for migration to Snowflake or BigQuery, where proper OLAP cube functionality would be available. The star schema foundation means that migration would preserve all the dimensional logic without redesign, which is exactly the right approach.


The criticism of the version was basically that I didn't have any quality control procedure so the data could be faulty: this is not admissible in a corporate context:

Strengths
The schema design is genuinely solid and will hold up to recruiter scrutiny. Separating fact_port_calls and fact_cargo_movements into two distinct grains is exactly the right Kimball call — a single conflated fact table is one of the most common junior mistakes, and you've avoided it. The decision to duplicate dimension FKs into fact_cargo_movements so each fact can be queried independently is defensible and well-documented in your README, which matters because being able to explain a design choice is as important as making the right one.
The YYYYMMDD integer date key is warehouse-standard and Power BI handles it natively. Your use of integer surrogate keys, a proper date spine, and no EAV patterns all signal familiarity with production warehouse conventions rather than just tutorial knowledge. The Docker setup means any recruiter or interviewer can spin this up in minutes, which removes friction entirely. Calibrating synthetic data to real published statistics (Maryland Port Administration, Valenciaport, etc.) is a strong touch — it shows commercial awareness, not just technical ability.

Weaknesses
No data quality layer. There are no CHECK constraints, no row-count assertions, and no validation step between generation and load. A recruiter from an analytics engineering background will notice this immediately. Even a small tests/ folder with a few SQL assertions (e.g. no negative dwell times, FK integrity checks, TEU totals within expected ranges) would address this completely.
Truncate-and-reload only. The loader always wipes and reloads everything. There's no incremental strategy, no watermark column, no concept of idempotency beyond the brute-force truncate. For a portfolio piece this is acceptable, but worth acknowledging in the README as a known simplification.
Seeds are git-ignored, so the repo is incomplete as-cloned. A recruiter browsing your GitHub sees no data at all until they run the scripts. You should either commit a small sample (say 500 rows per table) as seeds/samples/, or add a prominent note in the README explaining this and why (size, reproducibility).
The synthetic data lacks variety. This is your own observation and it's correct. Right now the generator likely produces distributions that are statistically plausible but feel repetitive — similar vessel types, similar cargo mixes, limited route diversity, no anomaly events. This is the main thing to fix in the scripts.
No sample visuals in the README. For a portfolio project targeting BI roles, the absence of even one screenshot of a query result or a dashboard preview is a missed opportunity. GitHub renders images in READMEs — a single good chart image raises the perceived quality significantly.
No CI. There's no GitHub Actions workflow running even a basic pg_prove or psql -c smoke test. This is a nice-to-have but increasingly expected in analytics engineering portfolios.

Connecting to Power BI Desktop
You'll need the Npgsql PostgreSQL driver installed on your machine first. Download it from npgsql.org — the ODBC or the native Power BI connector both work; the native one is cleaner.
Once Docker is running (docker-compose up -d) and data is loaded, open Power BI Desktop and go to Get Data → Database → PostgreSQL database. Enter localhost as the server and port_analytics as the database. Choose Import mode, not DirectQuery — for a portfolio project Import is fine and removes any live-connection complexity.
When the Navigator opens, do not import the raw fact and dimension tables directly. Instead, navigate to your views — mart_port_throughput, mart_vessel_performance, mart_route_analysis — and import those. This is the correct pattern and demonstrates that you understand the separation of storage from presentation. Import dim_date as well since Power BI needs it to drive its time intelligence.
In the Model view, Power BI will likely auto-detect most relationships from the column names. Verify that dim_date connects on the integer date key, that the two fact tables link via port_call_id, and set all dimension-to-fact cardinalities to many-to-one with single cross-filter direction. This gives you a clean star schema inside Power BI's engine that mirrors what you built in Postgres.
For the date table, right-click dim_date in the model and mark it as a Date Table using the full_date column. This unlocks Power BI's native time intelligence functions (YTD, QTD, rolling averages) without you having to write DAX workarounds.

Professional File & Version Hygiene
The right approach here is git-based, not deletion-based. Never simply delete old files from your working directory — that destroys history. The professional workflow is:
First, make sure everything is committed to git before you touch anything. Run git status and commit any untracked or modified files with a message like chore: snapshot before refactor. This gives you a safe restore point.
When you replace generate_data.py with an improved version, you don't keep the old one alongside it with a name like generate_data_old.py or generate_data_v1.py — that's amateur folder clutter. You simply overwrite the file, then commit with a meaningful message like feat: expand synthetic data variety — richer cargo mix, vessel anomalies, seasonal patterns. Git history is your version trail. Anyone browsing your GitHub can see exactly what changed and why.
For the README, same principle — edit in place, commit with a clear message. If you want to be thorough, use a feature branch: git checkout -b feat/richer-synthetic-data, make all your changes across the scripts and README, then open a pull request back to main. A merged PR with a description in your own GitHub repo looks excellent to recruiters because it mirrors real team workflow.
The .env file should already be in .gitignore — confirm it is. The seeds/ folder is also correctly git-ignored. The bad {schema,scripts,seeds,models} folder — since you've deleted it from disk, just run git status to confirm it was never tracked. If it shows as a deletion, git rm -r it and commit.